---
title: E1. Submedians (Easy Version)
type: docs
math: true
---

[View on Codeforces](https://codeforces.com/contest/2128/problem/E1)

## Problem Statement

This is the easy version of the problem. The only difference is that in this version, you are asked to find a subarray only for the **maximum submedian**.

You can make hacks only if both versions of the problem are solved.

### Definition

An integer $v$ is a **median** of an array $b$ of length $m$ if and only if:

- $v$ is greater than or equal to at least $\lceil \frac{m}{2} \rceil$ elements of the array, and
- $v$ is less than or equal to at least $\lceil \frac{m}{2} \rceil$ elements of the array.

#### Examples

- The only median of $[9, 3, 7]$ is $7$.
- The medians of $[5, 3, 7, 9]$ are $5$, $6$, and $7$.
- The only median of $[2, 2, 2]$ is $2$.

### Task

You're given an integer $k$ and an array $a_1, \ldots, a_n$ of integers between $1$ and $n$.

An integer $v$ from $1$ to $n$ is said to be a **submedian** if there exists at least one pair of indices $(l, r)$ such that:

- $1 \leq l \leq r \leq n$
- $r - l + 1 \geq k$
- $v$ is a median of the subarray $[a_l, \ldots, a_r]$

It can be proven that there always exists at least one submedian. Find the **maximum submedian** $v_{max}$ and any corresponding pair of indices $(l, r)$.


### Input

Each test contains multiple test cases.  
The first line contains the number of test cases $t$ ($1 \leq t \leq 50\,000$).  
The description of the test cases follows.

- The first line of each test case contains two integers $n$ and $k$ ($1 \leq k \leq n \leq 300\,000$).
- The second line of each test case contains $n$ integers $a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n$ ($1 \leq a_i \leq n$).

It is guaranteed that the sum of $n$ over all test cases doesn't exceed $300\,000$.


### Output

For each test case, output three integers $v_{max}$, $l$, and $r$ — the maximum submedian $v_{max}$ and the bounds of a subarray of length at least $k$ ($r - l + 1 \geq k$) such that $v_{max}$ is one of its medians.

If there are many solutions, you can print any of them.

## Solution


[submission](https://codeforces.com/contest/2128/submission/337179469)