---
title: Introduction of Riemannian Metrics
---

Historically, Riemannian geometry was a natural development of the differential geometry of surfaces in $\mathbf{R}^3$ . Given a surface $S \subset \mathbf{R}^3$ , we have a natural way of measuring the lengths of vectors tangent to $S$ , namely: the inner product $\langle v, w \rangle$ of two vectors tangent to $S$ at a point $p$ of $S$ is simply the inner product of these vectors in $\mathbf{R}^3$ . The way to compute the length of a curve is, by definition, to integrate the length of its velocity vector. The definition of $\langle, \rangle$ permits us to measure not only the lengths of curves in $S$ but also the area of domains in $S$ , as well as the angle between two curves, and all the other “metric” ideas used in geometry. More generally, these notions lead us to define on $S$ certain special curves, called geodesics, which possess the following property: given any two points $p$ and $q$ on a geodesic, sufficiently close (in a sense to be made precise later, Cf. Chap. 3), the length of such a curve is less than or equal to the length of any other curve joining $p$ to $q$ . Such curves behave, in many situations, as if they were “the straight lines” of $S$ , and, as we shall see later, play an important role in the development of geometry.

Observe that the definition of the inner product at each point $p \in S$ , yields, equivalently, a quadratic form $I_p$ , called the first fundamental form of $S$ at $p$ , defined in the tangent plane $T_pS$ by $I_p(v) = \langle v, v \rangle$ , $v \in T_pS$.

The crucial point of this development was an observation made by Gauss in his famous work (see Gauss [Ga]) published in 1827. In this work, Gauss defined a notion of curvature for surfaces, which measures the amount that $S$ deviates, at a point $p \in S$ , from its tangent plane at $p$ . In modern notation, Gauss’ definition can be expressed in the following terms. Define a mapping $g: S \to S^2 \subset \mathbf{R}^3$ of $S$ into the unit sphere $S^2$ of $\mathbf{R}^3$ , associating to every $p \in S$ a unit vector $N(p) \in S^2$ normal to $T_p S$ ; if $S$ were orientable then $g$ would be well-defined and differentiable on $S$ . During Gauss' time, the notion of orientation of surfaces was not well-understood (in truth, it wasn't until 1865 that Möbius presented his famous example, well-known today as the Möbius band), and so $g$ was defined on "pieces" of $S$ . In any case, $g$ is differentiable and it is possible then to speak of its differential $dg_p: T_p S \to T_{g(p)} S^2$ . Since $N(p)$ is normal to $T_p S$ , we can identify the two vector spaces $T_p S$ and $T_{g(p)} S^2$ , and thus it makes sense to speak of the determinant of the linear map $dg_p$ . Gauss defined his curvature as $K(p) = \det(dg_p)$ and showed that it agreed with the product of the principal curvatures introduced in 1760 by Euler.

Perhaps it is worthwhile mentioning that Euler defined the principal curvatures $k_1$ and $k_2$ of a surface $S$ by considering the curvature $k_n$ of curves obtained by intersecting $S$ with planes normal to $S$ at $p$ and taking $k_1 = \max k_n$ and $k_2 = \min k_n$ . At the time of Gauss it was not at all clear that one function or the other of $k_1$ and $k_2$ , would be an adequate definition of curvature. Gauss considered that the facts which he had obtained about $K$ justified the choice of $K = k_1 k_2$ as the curvature of $S$ .

The facts that Gauss alluded to were the following. In the first place, the curvature, as defined above, depends only on the manner of measuring in $S$ , that is, only on the first fundamental form $I$ . Secondly, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle formed by geodesics differs from $180^\circ$ by an expression that depends only on the curvature and the area of the triangle.

Everything indicates that Gauss perceived very clearly the profound implications of his discovery. In fact, one of the fundamental problems during Gauss' time was to decide if the fifth postulate of Euclid ("Given a straight line and a point not on the line then there is a straight line through the point which does not meet the given line") was independent of the other postulates of geometry. Although without immediate applications, the question leads to philosophical implications of primary importance. Earlier, it had been established that Euclid's fifth postulate is equivalent to the fact that the sum of the interior angles of a triangle equals $180^\circ$ . The discovery of Gauss implied, among other things, that it would be possible to imagine a geometry (at least in dimension two) that depended on a fundamental quadratic form given in an arbitrary

manner (without regard to the ambient space). In such a geometry, defining straight lines as geodesics, the sum of the interior angles of a triangle would depend on the curvature and, as Gauss actually verified, its difference from $180^\circ$ would be equal to the integral of the curvature over the triangle. Gauss, however, did not have the necessary mathematical tools available to develop his ideas (what he lacked was essentially the idea of a differentiable manifold) and he preferred not to discuss this topic openly. The actual appearance of a non-euclidean geometry was due, independently, to Lobatchevski (1829) and Bolyai(1831).

The ideas of Gauss were taken up again by Riemann in 1854 (see Riemann [Ri]), even though he was still without an adequate definition of a manifold. Using intuitive language and without proof, Riemann introduced what we call today a differentiable manifold of dimension $n$ . He further associated to every point of the manifold a fundamental quadratic form and then generalized the idea of Gaussian curvature to this situation (cf. Chap. 4). Furthermore, he stated many relations between the first fundamental quadratic form and the curvature that were only proved decades later. The reading of his work makes it clear that Riemann was motivated by the fundamental question implicit in the development of non-euclidean geometries, namely, the relationship between physics and geometry.

It is curious to observe that the concept of differentiable manifold, necessary for the formalization of the work of Riemann, only appeared explicitly in 1913 in the work of H. Weyl which made precise another of Riemann's audacious concepts, namely, Riemann surfaces. But that is another story.

Due to the lack of adequate tools, Riemannian geometry as such developed very slowly. An important outside source of stimulation was the application of these ideas to the theory of relativity in 1916. Another fundamental step was the introduction of the parallelism of Levi-Civita. We shall return to this topic in the next chapter. Our object here is not to write a complete history of Riemannian geometry but simply to trace its origin and supply motivation for what is to follow.

Our point of departure will be a differentiable manifold on which we introduce at each point a way of measuring the length of tangent vectors. This measurement should change differentiably from point to point. The explicit definition will be given in the next

section.

For the remainder of this book, the differentiable manifolds considered will be assumed to be Hausdorff spaces with countable bases. "Differentiable" will signify "of class $C^\infty$ ", and when $M^n = M$ denotes a differentiable manifold, $n$ denotes the dimension of $M$ .
